We're talking to Tony or Anthony Bliss?
What do you prefer?
Oh, Tony.
Tony, and to Ted.
Just for the sake of the tape recorder here, why don't you just tell us what your position is here at the Bancrofton?
Well, the title is Curator of Rare Books and Literary Manuskirts at Bancrofton.
And you're a third generation?
There's a gene pool.
Wow.
So we're looking at a photograph of... Grandpa.
Wesley.
Yes.
He started working for Henry Huntington in 1915.
And I have him in General Madness, by the way.
Yeah.
And your dad?
Started working at Huntington.
And his full name?
Cary.
C-A-R-E-Y.
Okay.
There he is.
He started working at Huntington's house.
He was 36.
Wow.
Did he also work at Huntington?
At this time, my grandfather, I guess, this is August of 66, my grandfather had just retired as librarian.
Dad was curator of her books, and I was working at a page, as a page, in the rear book stacks.
So, all three of us were on staff at Huntington at one time.
This is, you know, so you're a third-generation
I'm sure it's happened elsewhere, but I don't know.
It's fairly unusual, you know, whether it's some sort of genetic defect or— Let's bring this closer.
Some sort of genetic defect or what, I think.
But what does it betray?
How does that—what books is it?
Is it in age or what?
I don't know.
Do we have heredity or—
What are the terms of the dichotomy, heredity, or environment?
It's a little of both, I suppose.
Awfully.
Environment, I suppose, is probably a major factor.
I was always surrounded by books.
Books were always crowding us out around the house, and as a kid, I'd ask Dad a question, and he'd say, well, you could find it in here, and he'd hand it to me, and that would be it.
The sort of people who came through the house when I was a kid would be scholars working in Huntington, and I would hear most amazing discussions going on about bibliography and various historical and literary topics, much of which I couldn't follow.
There's some sort of osmosis factor, perhaps, that went there.
Yeah, but they could have bored you, too.
Yeah, but I mean, there was a time when Howard Nixon, who then was keeper of printed books at the British Library, was at Huntington, and he came down to the house for dinner, and we talked about baseball the whole evening.
I said, that's interesting.
Who would have thought they knew a publicist?
Well, he was trying to find out what in hell we were doing.
How old are you?
Fifty-one.
So when you added up, I started, I still remember my first day as a summer job, as a page at Huntington.
which, you know, it was just the path of least resistance in terms of finding a job for the summer.
The pay was absolutely horrible.
I think it was a dollar and a quarter an hour, and that would have been 64.
What was the point?
Well, I guess we'll try to—is this something you always assume that you'd be doing, I guess?
No, no.
As a matter of fact, I never gave it a thought.
I guess that means I had thirty-five years in the business.
That's what it means, yeah.
That is absolutely amazing.
Yeah, to do the math.
And not always in libraries.
I had one stint as a bookseller.
Where?
Two stints as a matter of fact, one in Paris.
I was a French major in college.
And where was that, in Williamson?
Yeah, and then I went back and worked a little while longer at Huntington, and once the draft was in the middle of the Vietnam War, of course, once the draft situation got settled, I was free to get on with my life.
This is one of those cases they say, worrying never solves anything.
Well, I worried about it so much I gave myself an Aussie.
That solved the problem.
Really?
Well, I was 4F.
I wasn't so lucky.
Well, I still have the remains of that offset.
You still have the offset, yeah.
I was a little bit older than you.
I went through in the 60s, 70s, 60s.
They got in?
Yeah, I suppose.
I was on an aircraft carrier, public affairs officer.
Oh, yeah.
I did two VNLs.
Anyway, that's history.
Right.
I got a master's at UCLA in France and had pretty much worked myself out of a job and I had to come up with something else and I decided well I'd done my junior year in France and I thought it was the most wonderful thing in the world so I liquidated my assets which meant I sold my Volkswagen and
bought a one-way charter ticket to London.
That was the cheapest destination.
And then got myself to Paris from there.
And I arrived with a suitcase and a typewriter.
I figured if I couldn't find a job, I'd go to Greece or Spain someplace cheap and write the great American novel.
And I was lucky.
I managed to find myself a job with an old-time bookstore by the name of Marcel Blanchetot.
B-L-A-N-C-H-E-T-B-A-U.
He had a shop pretty close to the Eiffel Tower.
By that time he was doing less antiquarian work and more new book jobbing to American libraries.
American, Canadian, British libraries.
And he wanted somebody who was bilingual too.
handle correspondence, this, that, and the other thing.
And so I wound up working with him for over two years, largely on the new book side, but when he came up with good antiquarian stuff, he would ask me to describe it and catalog it.
So you were becoming a bibliographer.
Well, I would agree, you know, and then some ideas on, well, who's going to be a customer for this?
And I helped him place a couple of fairly important books that way.
And I traveled books for him one year.
He said, well, I want you to do the rounds.
And I said, I was in, what, 25 states and five Canadian provinces in a period of six weeks.
And I wouldn't want to do that again.
It was amusing, sort of, once, but it got me into a lot of libraries that way, of course.
You mentioned outside that Pierre offered you a job, is that right?
Oh, yeah, when I first got there, this would have been March or April of 71, I had put an ad in a French trade publication, Bibliographie de la France,
And to my great surprise, I actually got an answer from none other than Pierre Barrest.
I couldn't believe it.
And so when I got to Paris, she said, when you get to town, do look me up.
So I did so.
And we had a brief chat on the phone, and they said, well, the shop is being on the Avenue Friedland is being remodeled, so would you
mind coming to my home, which is on the Avenue Fush.
Is that where you met him?
So he took us to dinner.
I went in there.
I couldn't figure out which door to go in.
I finally picked the biggest one and brazenly knocked.
And we walked in and we sat in the little breakfast nook, which has only the small Cezanne's on the wall.
And he asked me if I liked whiskey, and did I mind having whiskey before lunch?
And I thought I might as well.
I had nothing to lose.
And we talked about things, and he was interested in strategies I might have for putting together whole collections and selling them en bloc as research collections to university libraries.
And I had to admit that I hadn't given that much thought, but I could see that there was merit to it.
at the end of the year on American universities, I was never rolling in dough.
And a lot of money was being spent stupidly, but there was certainly a lot of money out there.
And we talked about that for a bit.
And then he said, well, I see some possibilities here, and I'd be willing to offer you 900 francs a month, starting next September.
What was I supposed to do in the meantime?
And you could die on 900, 100 frames a month with no problem at all.
So thank you for the whiskey.
Yeah, thank you.
And I love the Cezanne, but I'm afraid this is not, this probably won't work for me.
I wound up at a couple of other shops in one auction house trying to see whether there was some possibilities for me.
And then I wound up with Mr. Blanc still.
And then, how did you get into the same old show?
Well, then I met my future wife there when I walked into Blancsteau's that first day.
Oh, yeah, right there.
Freshman?
Yeah.
His secretary, seated behind him, were actually on the other side of the room, and it was very touching.
I mean, she looked up and said, Christ, another American.
She said that?
Yeah.
In French.
As soon as you couldn't understand her.
Yeah, she had a long couple of days, yeah.
She took two weeks.
And so it was fake.
She said, what could she do?
That's great.
But she was... This was in 1971.
This was in 1971.
Twenty-six years ago.
Are there any fourth-generation Bliss librarians in the works?
Well, there are two other Blisses out there.
They're both in college now.
Male, female?
No, no.
We have Edward, who is a senior at Colgate, and Adrian is a sophomore at Hamilton, and Edward works four hours a week in science, by the way.
Actually, we love the Eastern Liberal Arts School.
Well, they wanted to do what Daddy did.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
which is why I guess we love books.
Same thing, yeah, right, yeah.
Living a liberalized education is how you do that.
Well, when I was at Williams, I worked in the Chapin Library for Archer, and, you know, this is mafia for a book librarian, and I think it was a much closer in it group back in those days than it is now.
There are more of us now.
than there used to be.
But when we were talking about what college you want to go to, my dad sort of talked to people, Archers of Williams, and so-and-so, and so-and-so, and so-and-so, and so-and-so.
And the other thing, I didn't know if I could get into any of these places, but that was kind of the way we went through the list.
Well, yes, it was pretty amazing.
Do you have any anxiety?
I mean, I've talked to Peter and I've talked to Charles and...
You know, we all know what's happening with money for books and for computer systems, and how much money is being spent on special collections, which is next, you know.
Coming from the kind of book tradition that you're doing, generational as well as your own extensive background of thirty million-odd years, what do you feel?
I mean, softball down the middle of the plate.
Books aren't going away.
They are, they are not.
And what bothers me a lot is that the digitized library, the electronic library, is really so much oversold.
It's a real annoyance to be in a horse and buggy era of digital libraries and that sort of thing, because the expectations are sky high, and the reality is just barely off the ground.
But that's where they're going with the money.
It is, until there's going to be a reality check.
And here at Berkeley, I think we're starting to see it set in, where the faculty realize that, yeah, we're going to have to go ahead with that and the other thing.
But that's an add-on.
That's not an instead-of cost.
Well, as Peter said, there's no allowance for inflation here.
You have the same budget every year.
Since 1989, that's eight years.
This particular institution is falling behind.
There have been, in the history of the Berkeley libraries, there have been other times when floods got tight and things had to be stopped.
That creates gaps in the collection, particularly in things like periodical.
Well, we discussed that in life.
Yeah, because even ordinary type things.
Because here you get up to 1971, and boom, there's a five-year gap.
And then it picks up in 76 and carries on.
What the hell's going on here?
You can explain to the faculty member or the student that, oh yeah, we ran out of money for those five years.
That's kind of a service to staff, particularly if you're a major institution like this, which I think should be a library of record.
and can't be at that point.
I'm going to fall away from that.
Is it a possibility that you may no longer be perceived as a library of records?
If this time continues long enough, yeah.
I mean, we could live on our laurels for a long time.
You've got great stuff.
Are you still acquiring special collections?
Absolutely.
In what areas?
Are you doing stuff to satisfy the needs of scholars now?
Are you looking ahead twenty or thirty years?
I'm laying track in front of the scholarly locomotive as fast as I can.
And there's a lot of stuff out there.
Here's the collection policy, the last draft, we're working on a new one.
Is that something I can get at some point?
I could give you one.
Because this is, you know, just looking at the table of contents, you see the kind of
stuff that's out there that we're working on in terms of... Yeah, I'd love to get a copy of this.
The whole thing is... Let me get you the revised... Okay, it's just coming up.
I just... You know, this book is... This book will be published in 1999, by the way.
Good, because I haven't finished that.
So it's time.
But that's called the... What is that called?
Just the Bancroft Collection Policy.
And we're doing it now, and we're doing it with the advice and counsel of interested faculty.
And we're trying to interest more and more faculty all the time, of course.
And we're being successful at that, because we're finding more and more people coming in.
For various things, and this is the time of year I get booked to talk to classes about this, that, and the other thing.
And this afternoon I have to talk about Rousseau for three hours.
I don't have to like Rousseau.
And sure, I can't talk about him for three hours, but I feel that the students ought to see the text they're reading in their original form.
Then I will try and point out to them the impact of the original technology on the presentation and the actual content of the text.
You know, what does it mean to have to set the type by hand, lay it out, get the pages in the right order, make mistakes, stop the press, change things.
What is the impact of the technology on the text that you're reading?
And there is an impact.
It does make a difference.
And there are mistakes introduced, can be introduced at any number of places along the line.
And to detect that, you have to know what the technology is.
You have two sons and father.
Son and a daughter.
Some sons.
Adrienne.
Adrienne, double N-E.
A-d-r-i.
I-e-n-n-e.
Okay.
And she is?
She's a sophomore at Hamilton.
She's at Hamilton.
And the son is at Colgate.
Colgate, yeah.
I think my wife would kill him.
Why?
Oh, um... She'd rebel, certainly.
Yeah.
She'd be near, at least.
She wouldn't, uh... I think she's maybe a little more ambitious.
She herself actually has a library degree.
From the Astutie Catholique in Paris as a, they call it a documentary.
And what's your wife's name?
Marie-Noel.
M-A-R-I-E.
Yeah.
Dash.
N-O-E-L-N-E.
With a diuresis over the E. Thirsty and Noel.
Two dots.
That's how you pronounce the O and the E separately.
That's right.
That's what it means to me.
Go ahead.
But, no, she said, oh, no, she wants to do something else.
There's enough of this librarian and stuff.
But do you think it's a group industry?
Librarianship?
No.
It's becoming much more technical.
But we are starting to see a problem, and that is that there is nonetheless a certain demand out there for the people who know something about books.
And it's very hard to, in this day and age, find a library school at all
And worse, one that has any kind of program in the history in books and printing, or certification in rare book librarianship.
There are summer programs out there, like the University of Virginia.
Cherries, yeah.
Cherries.
I'm speaking there actually.
But it's not a rigorous program.
When I went through UCLA Library School, which was after my stint in France,
I decided that I was going to have to do something so that I could actually earn a living.
So you got a degree from UCLA?
Yeah.
I had my Master's in French, and then I went back and did the Master's in Library Science with what they called in those days a specialization in rare books and manuscripts.
So you are a librarian.
You are, in fact, a trained librarian.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, my grandfather went to library school with Melville Dewey.
At Columbia.
No, at Albany.
And then my father didn't get a library degree, and then I did.
But it was made clear to me that the way the profession worked in those days, I wouldn't get any kind of job unless I had the library degree, which wasn't enormously relevant to rare book librarianship.
The usual curriculum, but the specialized courses, certainly one.
This university, this here, no longer has a library school.
Well, we have something in that building, but it's the School of Information Management and Systems.
Are there any courses in bibliography?
No.
And they used to have a typographical lab in the basement for students to work with and actually set type and print and then make paper.
I've recovered most of that and brought it over here to Bancroft.
We already had it.
How did you feel when that happened?
Very sad.
And the dean over there, Hal Varian, likes books.
He's a little bit of a book collector himself.
What's his name?
Hal Varian, V-A-R-I-A-N.
Varian and Associates.
Well, it wasn't his decision, I'm sure.
You know, I mean, this is what he came in
This is what he was brought in to do, was to work on programming, information management, and not paper-based materials at all.
Well, that's making a statement for university, isn't it?
And whether or not there is room for a professional school to do only that on a campus that also is a powerhouse in computer studies.
As this university is.
As Berkeley is.
I don't know.
I don't know if he's going to be able to stake out that territory and defend it and have a viable school.
We'll see.
I don't know.
When did this happen?
Oh, gosh, this was three years ago, I think.
Of course, Columbia's program is history, too.
It's gone.
Texas is still out there, and so it's— And Wisconsin is supposed to be history.
Wisconsin and Michigan.
I think Oregon is still going.
But the only library degree you can get in the state of California is at San Jose State.
Okay, that one is down there.
Did you know that?
Is he?
Yeah, he's teaching two courses.
I'm seeing him tonight, by the way.
Thank you.
The last one, I'm sure if I try to get the architects to go home.
And then we'll home.
Yeah.
What's your time constraint, by the way?
I have to go talk about Rousseau at about 3.
So I could go for a bit home.
Okay.
Now that we've met, I can call you, which is good.
But go ahead, just so I know what we've got for time.
I've forgotten where I was.
Well, we're talking about the school, and the disappearance thereof, and the statement.
You know, what worries me about that is that we're going to be producing generations of scholars coming to the history department, and the English department, and the various language departments, where they're working with all their texts.
And they're not going to have the bibliographical awareness that they need.
You know, can I set a Marie Antoinette letter in front of this class and say, is there anything fishy about this?
And it's written in ballpoint pen on wood pulp paper, and would anybody notice?
Would you just jump out at them?
Somebody might notice.
But I worry that a lot of them wouldn't.
If you're working with documents and you're working with older material, you have to have some equipment to deal, to understand what it is you're looking at.
There's a lot of fakes and frauds out there.
That's just one example of the sort of application that I wish they had.
There seems to be a little trend growing, and I noticed this has happened in Iowa, putting together interdisciplinary programs
on history of the book and bibliography.
And there are a lot of topics that could be folded into that.
And I'm very interested, we've got some people interested in doing this sort of thing here on the Berkeley Tandos, and I hope it turns out to be possible.
And I would love to participate in that.
Though around here librarians, well you can teach, but the library can't offer courses.
But librarians can, can be brought in as Edja.
Could you give me some specifics about the kind of special collections you are acquiring?
Well, for example, we're getting a lot of play just now on a purchase I made last fiscal year of sixty titles of the Bibliotec Bleu.
which is popular literature mostly 18th century.
The ones I managed to get were all 18th century.
B-L-E-U-E?
B-L-E-U-E.
There's a writer actually in it, of it, in the latest Bank of Indiana.
I wrote an article on it.
Do you have one here?
No, I need one.
Let me do that.
Oh, that's great.
And this is a terrifically interesting match of stuff.
What it is, is popular literature.
A lot of the stuff that was published in it are medieval survivals.
So that you have, for example, I'm going to be showing it this afternoon.
You've got the Encyclopédie, and you've got Diderot, and the Philosophe,
Rousseau out there, and they're all powdered within an inch of their lives, and incredibly refined and wonderfully intelligent.
And these are the talk of all of the salons, and these are the worry of the king and whatnot.
And what's the guy in the street reading?
He's reading about Romances of Chivalry, and The Dance of Death, and all these medieval survivals.
And what's also pretty interesting is that it's not California history?
No.
No, it's in Bancroft.
Yeah, I know, but it does indicate that you are continuing to be— Well, Bancroft's a little schizo, because obviously the Bancroft Library, per se, goes back to Hubert Howe, Bancroft, Western Americana, and Mexico, and that's the reputation.
But back in—what was it?
when Jim Hart became directed, he negotiated the merger of the Berkeley's Fair Book Department with Bancroft.
And it was sort of an orphan department that was put together grudgingly in 1954.
It just wasn't the Berkeley way.
Books circulated and that was it.
So I got interconnected with book pockets in them.
Wow.
I've never pressed that before.
Berkeley just didn't like that sort of approach, and so resisted for years.
Even though the material was actually here, that almost any institution would have put in a
a rare book collection, or a treasure room, or some such thing, which is a beastly thing to do, a treasure room.
Berkeley didn't want to do that.
But finally, there was just too much.
It had to be dealt with more of a response.
And so, it wasn't until 54 that they actually had set up their department and put somebody in charge of it.
They didn't fund much of anything else.
And so it became a repository when stuff was given, and it was quite a passive operation.
So it made sense to merge it with Bancroft, because there were a few overlaps.
You know, the rare book collection had great collections of Western writers, people like Frank Norris, for example.
I don't have dovetails, but Bancroft, in many respects, named Rose Bierce.
In the old time, Bancroft just thought this, of course, was heresy.
It was going to delete the mission of the Bancroft Library.
But I think the results that we've seen over the years, you know, largely I suppose because of Jim Hart's driving personality, was that it was a success for both.
Because when we, back in 70, there was one endowment for acquisition.
that actually had belonged to the Old Rail Book Department.
And now they're going to have a list of three pages of endowed funds.
Now, some of them don't bring in very much, and some of them bring in a month.
But that, that court looks for, you know, these are usually just lists of funds that now exist.
So you have somebody to work with each year?
Oh, yeah.
How much would you say you have for the acquisitions?
That's the bottom line.
I'm not sure how I'd hear what this is.
That includes the state money.
It's pushing in, isn't it?
That's all together.
That's good for acquisitions.
Some of it is not restricted only to acquisitions.
Most of it is.
What is hard to fund from outside is any kind of operational expense.
Very hard to get an endowment for pencils.
Or processing, for example.
This is one of the things that's a big problem for us.
You know, we were very successful bringing in collections and archives and whatnot, but they're no good until they're processed.
This is one of the digital fallacies.
You know, while you digitize it, forget it.
You can't digitize something that isn't processed without having got some order or some index imposed on it.
But you are digitizing some of your collections, though, and making them available.
I just had a chat with Barclay.
Oh, yeah.
Very, very interesting there.
Yeah, Mike Barclay.
He and I arrived on the scene here about 20 times.
He's a philosopher, you know.
He studied philosophy in the beginning.
But it's also interesting that he wears both hats.
Yeah, yeah.
And he's been pushed into the position of the digital library controller guru.
Yeah.
You know, we're digitizing papyri at the moment.
Even as we speak, we're digitizing papyri.
And Barclay, as I see, is writing, heard on that.
How the hell do you scan papyri?
Very carefully.
Yeah.
They're mounted in glass.
This is, we've gotten a lot of publicity over this.
The papyri recovered from crocodile mummies, and then
put up in plastic, and the plastic is just horrible, and so I had to undo that.
And this is all part of my daily life, and it's been just a horrible worry of mine.
There's been publicity that they've done stuff published on this?
Yeah.
Where?
All over the place.
Geez, I've just got that file.
I could try and see if there's one thing that is good that would
I'll throw stuff under here.
Oops, sorry.
I'm never leaving, getting tons of stuff.
Oh, could we get a copy of that?
Oh, great.
This is kind of stupid.
I'll find something better.
Is that stupid, too?
I can have that.
I can run a copy this way.
Anyway, it was just a Krone article.
Yeah, this was the guy who wrote it all up from the press release and wrote it up as if he'd talked to me anyhow.
That's why I hate the Chronicle.
It's terrible in the newspaper.
Oh, yes.
I had a job to work here many years ago when I got out of the service and went back for it.
I can find better stuff than that.
But at least it'll give me something to know about it, though.
Yeah, I will give you...
He's just leaning and burgeoning all over life.
You know, we've got this Cal Heritage Digity thing going on.
We've got the papyri going on.
Digitizing the papyri is nothing.
The real problem is doing the conservation work.
And so, in this day and age, you throw in a digital component so that you get the money to do what you really need to do.
You just save the stuff before it goes under.
This stuff was in plastic, which was damaging because it was flexible.
So I had to get it out of those plastic mounts, which was done in the late 30s.
And it will be explained in the other costume that I find it here.
And to do that is very difficult, because as soon as you separate the two pieces of the plastic sandwich, you generate a huge static field.
And, of course, the papyrus ensign wants to stick to one or the other or both.
And this had stymied previous.
Well, it's a pretty cautionary tale, isn't it, huh?
Oh, yeah.
And so I said, you know, this is a big university.
We've got electrical engineers.
So I picked up the phone and I called the electrical engineering department.
I said, I got this bill.
And I said, oh, well, you ought to talk to, what's her name?
Alan Boros, I think was her name.
Okay, so I got a hold of her.
And I explained to her and she said, oh, okay, let me think about it.
And she got back to me within the day.
She said, well, you've got two options.
You can use a wand of radioactive, I thought she said plutonium, or you can use an ionizing fan.
I said, well, I don't think we want to have plutonium on that in the library.
Oh, no, not plutonium, polonium.
Life, only 90 days.
Nowhere near as dangerous.
I said, okay, fine.
107.
There you are.
You got it right?
Excellent.
Give a paper clip here.
I don't know what the heck this is.
True truth.
Yeah, good.
You know what, I'm going to let you go.
Say it again.
I mean, what bothers me so much about the computer age is how
undemocratic and, in a sense, elitist it is, because who has the access to all these wonderful resources?
Well, it's the people who can fork out $2,500, $3,000 plus line charges to have them have a setup at hand.
And that's just the beginning.
Then we need software.
Yeah, and then you have to figure it out.
And we're talking about doing all of this from the
for the K-12 schools.
Why can't we just say schools?
No, it has to be K-12.
It just doesn't—I just don't see that it's going to get out there.
Whereas, well, in the other words, they will object, well, yeah, but you had to go to the library.
libraries are still there, and they're not very far from anybody, do they?
And everybody was on the same footing.
That at least was egalitarian.
But now it's just whoever can pay.
And the pressure in libraries is cost recovery.
You're going to see libraries charging for anything they can get away with charging for.
And that
us old-time librarian types, it really goes against our grain.
We're supposed to be dispensing knowledge for free.